---
layout: post
title: Milestone 1
---

## 1. Data Acquisition
1. Write a brief tutorial on how your team downloaded the dataset. Imagine :) that you were searching for a guide on how to download the play-by-play data; your guide should make you go “Perfect - this is exactly what I was looking for!”. Include your function/class, and provide an example of using it. Please ensure you’re not just demonstrating that your functionality works - this is also an exercise in documenting and communicating your implementation. It does not need to be extremely complicated, but we expect something slightly more coherent and digestible than just screenshots of your functions/code.


## 2. Interactive Debugging Tool
1. Implement an ipywidget (or interactive tool of your choosing) that allows you to flip through all of the events, for every game of a given season, with the ability to switch between the regular season and playoffs. Draw the event coordinates on the provided ice rink image, similar to the example shown below (you can just print the event data when there are no coordinates). You may also print whatever information you find useful, such as game metadata/boxscores, and event summaries (but this is not required). Take a screenshot of the tool and add it to the blog post, accompanied with the code for the tool and a brief (1-2 sentences) description of what your tool does. You do not need to worry about embedding the tool into the blogpost.


## 3. Tidy Data
1. In your blog post, include a small snippet of your final dataframe (e.g. using head(10)). You can just include a screenshot rather than fighting to get the tables neatly formatted in HTML/markdown.

2. In a few sentences, discuss at least 3 additional features you could consider creating from the data available in this dataset. We’re not looking for any particular answers, but if you need some inspiration, could a shot or goal be classified as a rebound/shot off the rush (explain how you’d determine these!) ?


## 4. Simple Visualizations
1. Produce a figure comparing the shot types over all teams (i.e. just aggregate all of the shots), in a season of your choosing. Overlay the number of goals overtop the number of shots. What appears to be the most dangerous type of shot? The most common type of shot? Why did you choose this figure? Add this figure and discussion to your blog post.

2. What is the relationship between the distance a shot was taken and the chance it was a goal? Produce a figure for each season between 2018-19 to 2020-21 to answer this, and add it to your blog post along with a couple of sentences describing your figure. Has there been much change over the past three seasons? Why did you choose this figure?

3. Combine the information from the previous sections to produce a figure that shows the goal percentage (# goals / # shots) as a function of both distance from the net, and the category of shot types (you can pick a single season of your choice). Briefly discuss your findings; e.g. what might be the most dangerous types of shots?


## 5. Advanced Visualizations: Shot Maps
1. Export the 4 plot offensive zone plots to HTML, and embed it into your blog post. Your plot must allow users to select any team during the selected season.
   Note: Because you can find these figures on the internet, answering these questions without producing these figures will not get you any marks!

2. Discuss (in a few sentences) what you can interpret from these plots.

4. Consider the Colorado Avalanche; take a look at their shot map during the 2016-17 season. Discuss what you could say about the team during this season. Now look at the shot map for the Colorado Avalanche for the 2020-21 season, and discuss what you could conclude from these differences. Does this make sense? Hint: look at the standings.

5. Consider the Buffalo Sabres, which have been a team that has struggled over recent years, and compare them to the Tampa Bay Lightning, a team which has won the Stanley for two years in a row. Look at the shot maps for these two teams from the 2018-19, 2019-20, and 2020-21 seasons. Discuss what observations you can make. Is there anything that could explain the Lightning’s success, or the Sabres’ struggles? How complete of a picture do you think this paints?



s
